Right-To-Control Public Manifesto (RTCPM)

20th of August, 2020. Second Revision


The purpose of this manifesto is to give more freedom to the legitimate owners, customers, and anyone who has legally obtained physical access to an electronic device. It's scope is the entire electronic device industry, including but not limited to: Computers, Mobile Phones, IoT equipment, processors, video cards (GPUs) and any other type of electronic object that has the capability to execute digital computarized instructions. Any mention of an object that fits that definition will be named in the Manifesto, from now on, as ("DEVICE")
We understand the word ("CONTROL") as the maximum possible level of digital privilege that can be obtained in a device. We define ("PRIVILEGE") as the ability of the owner of the device to execute/run code on said device. If a device had more than one electronic SoC or chip that can execute code, each one is also classified as its own device, and therefore the same terms apply to it.

We also define the different ("STATUS") of devices. In this document, the word "STATUS" means the current state of the device if it was affected, or not, by the choice of its owmer to exercise their control rights. We define the ("INTACT") status as the state of a device when its code or its native software parts/layers are not modified by its owner. We define ("NATIVE PARTS") as the pre-installed, and/or further updated or changed software and/or firmware that has been officially approved by the manufacturer of a device, AND to which its existence and inner workings are necessary for the device to perform its intended functions. We define the ("MODIFIED") status of a device as the consequence of its owner making use of their control rights to perform any type of modification to the pre-installed, manufacturer-approved native parts/layers of the software on said device. 

1. "Any electronic device that can give its manufacturer full control of its software and hardware must give the same level of control, without restriction, to any legitimate owner of said device. If full control is not physically possible (for example, if a device has a burned ROM that can't be written to) then the manufacturer must provide the highest level of control that it can exercise as the OEM. For example, by providing the private keys used to sign firmware on top of tbe non-writable BootROM, or, by providing the legitimate owner with a temporary key that can give the same level of control. (However, the part of the device that checks for such key must also be writable once the temporary key is suppllied, otherwise full control can never be achieved since the manufacturer would be tbe only entity capable of generating the mentioned keys)"

2. "The status of the device (whether "intact" or "modified") shall not be made public or in any way notified to the manufacturer or to the services that may use the device, unless explicitly authorised by the owner".

3. "No manufacturer, company, organization or agency shall disable, suspend, or otherwise refuse to provide a service to the device, if the reason for the disabling, suspension, or refusal to provide said service is, entirely or in part, the refusal of the owner to disclose the status (either "intact" or "modified") of said device.

4. “Any possible method of remote control, updating, or otherwise modifying any instances and/or layers of the software on the device by the manufacturer, company or agency shall be disclosed to the owner of the device before purchase.”
